		DEVise JavaScreen Configuration Information
		$Id$

* INTRODUCTION

This file explains the various configuration variables that are found
in JavaScreen's Makefile.config.

Note:  there are actually two parts to the JavaScreen server software:
the JSPoP (JavaScreen Point of Presence) and the JSS/DEVised.  The
usual setup is to install both parts in the same directory on the same
machine.  However, the two parts can be installed in separate directories
or even on separate machines.  The main reason you might want to do this
is that your web server machine is an architecture that DEVise can't
run on.  Anyhow, the capability to do this "split" setup adds a bit
to the complexity of the configuration, even if you don't use it.


* CONFIGURATION VARIABLES

    Software we need
    ----------------

JAVA_BIN2: the directory containing the java executable you want to use
for the JSS.  This needs to be the path *on the machine the JSS will
run on*.

PERL_BIN2 = the directory containing the perl executable you want to use
for the JSS.  This needs to be the path *on the machine the JSS will
run on*.

XVFB_BIN2 = the directory containing the Xvfb executable you want to use.
This needs to be the path *on the machine the JSS will run on*.

JAVA_BIN2P: the directory containing the java executable you want to use
for the JSPoP.  This needs to be the path *on the machine the JSPoP will
run on*.

PERL_BIN2P:  the directory containing the perl executable you want to use
for the JSPoP.  This needs to be the path *on the machine the JSPoP will
run on*.

JAVA_BIN3:  the directory containing the java executable you want to use
for compiling (don't worry about this for *installing* the JavaScreen).


    Install directories
    -------------------

POP_DIR:  the directory into which the JSPoP will be installed.  This
directory does not have to be within the web server tree.  It doesn't
even need to be readable by the web server, unless the same user that's
running the web server is also running the JavaScreen.

SERV_DIR  the directory into which the JSS and DEVised will be installed.
Note:  this should usually be the same as the POP_DIR.  If you are
doing a "split" install you should email devise@cs.wisc.edu or
wenger@cs.wisc.edu for more information.

JAR_DIR:  the directory into which the jar files will be installed.
This directory should be within your web server directory tree.

CGI_DIR:  the directory into which the CGI scripts will be installed.
This directory should be within your web server directory tree.


    ID string
    ---------

IDSTR:  the ID string for your JavaScreen installation.  Different ID
strings are used to differentiate between multiple JavaScreen installations
on the same machine.  If you are using only a single JavaScreen per
machine, you should leave this string as "regular".


    DEVise demo directory
    ---------------------
DEVISE_VIS:  the directory in which the DEVise demo area is installed;
in other words, the directory generated by untarring
Devise-x.x.x_test-demo.tar.gz in the first step of the DEVise installation.


    Miscellaneous
    -------------

ERROR_EMAIL:  the user to which to send email when any error occurs
with the JavaScreen.  (For example, if the JSPoP gets hung and has to
be restarted.)

INSTALL_HOST:  if specified, this variable will cause a warning
to be printed, and confirmation requested, if you try to do an install
on a machine other than the one specified.  This is mainly useful if
you have a shared file system, and want to avoid accidentally doing
an install on the wrong machine.

KILL_XVFB:  whether or not to kill Xvfb when restarting the JSPoP.
(1 means kill Xvfb, 0 means don't kill it.)  If you're only running
a single JavaScreen installation on a given machine, you should set
this to 1.  Sometimes the JSPoP has to restart because of Xvfb getting
hung; in this case, of course, if Xvfb is not killed, the problem
will just repeat with a new JSPoP.
