
		     The Physiology of Perception
			 By Walter J. Freeman


The brain transforms sensory messages into conscious perceptions
almost instantly Chaotic, collective activity involving millions of
neurons seems essential for such rapid recognition.

From: February 1991 Scientific American, Vol 264, (2) Pgs. 78-85.

WALTER J. FREEMAN is professor of Neurobiology at the University of
California, Berkeley. He received an M.D. from Yale University in 1954
and completed postdoctoral training in neurophysiology at the
University of California, Los Angeles, in l959, the year he joined the
Berkeley faculty.

When a person glimpses the face of a famous actor, sniffs a favorite
food or hears the voice of a friend, recognition is instant.  Within a
fraction of a second after the eyes, nose, ears, tongue or skin is
stimulated, one knows the object is familiar and whether it is
desirable or dangerous. How does such recognition, which psychologists
call preattentive perception, happen so accurately and quickly, even
when the stimuli are complex and the context in which they arise
varies?

Much is known about the way the cerebral cortex, the outer rind of the
brain, initially analyzes sensory messages. Yet investigations are
only now beginning to suggest how the brain moves beyond the mere
extraction of features-how it combines sensory messages with past
experience and with expectation to identify both the stimulus and its
particular meaning to the individual.

My own group's studies, carried out over more than 30 years at the
University of California at Berkeley, suggest that perception cannot
be understood solely by examining properties of individual neurons, a
microscopic approach that currently dominates neuroscience
research. We have found that perception depends on the simultaneous,
cooperative activity of millions of neurons spread throughout expanses
of the cortex.  Such global activity can be identified, measured and
explained only if one adopts a macroscopic view alongside the
microscopic one.

There is an analogy to this approach in music. To grasp the beauty in
a choral piece, it is not enough to listen to the individual singers
sequentially. One must hear the performers together, as they modulate
their voices and timing in response to one another.

Our studies have led us as well to the discovery in the brain of
chaos-complex behavior that seems random but actually has some hidden
order.  The chaos is evident in the tendency of vast collections of
neurons to shift abruptly and simultaneously from one complex activity
pattern to another in response to the smallest of inputs.

This changeability is a prime characteristic of many chaotic
systems. It is not harmful in the brain. In fact, we propose it is the
very property that makes perception possible. We also speculate that
chaos underlies the ability of the brain to respond flexibly to the
outside world and to generate novel activity patterns, including those
that are experienced as fresh ideas.

An understanding of perception must be based on knowledge of the
properties of the neurons that enact it. My colleagues and I have
concentrated in many of our studies on neurons of the olfactory
system.

For years it has been known that when an animal or a person sniffs an
odorant, molecules carrying the scent are captured by a few of the
immense number of receptor neurons in the nasal passages; the
receptors are somewhat specialized in the kinds of odorants to which
they respond.  Cells that become excited fire action potentials, or
pulses, which propagate through projections called axons to a part of
the cortex known as the olfactory bulb. The number of activated
receptors indicates the intensity of the stimulus, and their location
in the nose conveys the nature of the scent.  That is, each scent is
expressed by a spatial pattern of receptor activity, which in turn is
transmitted to the bulb.

The bulb analyzes each input pattern and then synthesizes its own
message, which it transmits via axons to another part of the olfactory
system, the olfactory cortex. From there, new signals are sent to many
parts of the brain-not the least of which is an area called the
entorhinal cortex, where the signals are combined with those from
other sensory systems. The result is a meaning-laden perception, a
gestalt, that is unique to each individual. For a dog, the recognition
of the scent of a fox may carry the memory of food and expectation of
a meal. For a rabbit, the same scent may arouse memories of chase and
fear of attack.

Such knowledge has provided a valuable starting point for more
detailed study of olfaction. But it leaves two important issues
unresolved. The first is the classic problem of separating foreground
from background: How does the brain distinguish one scent from all
others that accompany it?

"PHASE PORTRAITS" made from electroencephalograms (EEGs) generated by
a computer model of the brain reflect the overall activity of the
olfactory system at rest (above) and during perception of a familiar
scent (right). Resemblance of the portraits to irregularly shaped, but
still structured, coils of wire reveals that brain activity in both
conditions is chaotic: complex but having some underlying order. The
more circular shape of the right-hand image, together with its greater
segregation of color, indicates that olfactory EEGs are more
ordered-more nearly periodic-during perception than during rest.

Also, how does the brain achieve what is called generalization-over-
equivalent receptors? Because of turbulence in nasal air flow, only a
few of the many receptors that are sensitive to an odorant are excited
during a sniff, and the selection varies unpredictably from one sniff
to the next.  How does the brain recognize that signals from different
collections of receptors all refer to the same stimulus? Our
investigations begin to suggest answers to both problems.

Many of our insights were derived from intensive studies of the
olfactory bulb. Those experiments show clearly that every neuron in
the bulb participates in generating each olfactory perception. In
other words, the salient information about the stimulus is carried in
some distinctive pattern of bulbwide activity, not in a small subset
of feature-detecting neurons that are excited only by, say, foxlike
scents.

Moreover, although this collective neural activity reflects the
odorant, the activity itself is not determined solely by the
stimulus. Bulbar functioning is self-organized, very much controlled
by internal factors, including the sensitivity of the neurons to
input.

The experiments uncovering the collective activity were conceptually
simple. By applying standard reinforcement techniques, we trained
animals, often rabbits, to recognize several different odorants and to
behave in particular ways when they did-for instance, to lick or chew
in expectation of food or water. Before training was started, we
attached 60 to 64 electrodes 0.5 millimeter apart in a gridlike array
to a large part of the bulbar surface.

During training and thereafter, the array enabled us to collect sets
of 60 to 64 simultaneously recorded electroencephalogram (EEG)
tracings as the animals breathed in and out, sometimes sniffing
familiar scents and sometimes not. Each tracing reflects the mean
excitatory state of local pools of neurons lying in a well-defined
layer immediately beneath the electrodes. Rises in the wavelike
tracings indicate increasing excitement; dips represent diminished
excitement caused by inhibition.

The EEGs should not be confused with recordings of impulses fired by
individual axons or by pools of neurons, although each EEG is related
to the firing pattern of neurons in a neighborhood of the cerebral
cortex. The tracings detect essentially the same information that
neurons assess when they "decide" whether or not to fire impulses, but
an EEG records that information for thousands of cells at once.

To better understand exactly what the EEG shows, it helps to know some
of the details of how cortical neurons operate. Such cells
continuously receive pulses-usually at projections known as
dendrites-from thousands of other neurons. The pulses are conveyed at
specialized junctions called synapses.  Certain incoming pulses
generate excitatory waves of electric current in the recipients;
others generate inhibitory waves [see top illustration on page
82]. These currents-"dendritic currents"-are fed through the cell body
(which contains the nucleus) to a region called the trigger zone, at
the start of the axon.

There the currents cross the cell membrane into the extracellular
space. As they do, the cell calculates the overall strength of the
currents (reflected in changes in voltage across the membrane),
essentially by adding excitatory currents and subtracting inhibitory
ones. If the sum is above a threshold level of excitation, the neuron
fires.

The mechanism producing each EEG tracing similarly sums the currents
initiated at the dendrites, but it taps the currents after they leave
the cell.  The tracings reflect the excitatory state of groups of
neurons rather than of individual ones, because the extracellular
space is traversed by currents from thousands of cells.

BASIC FLOW OF OLFACTORY INFORMATION IN THE BRAIN

In our experiments the EEG tracings from the electrodes in an array
are as unpredictable and irregular as freehand scrawls. Yet they
manifest perceptual information.

In living individuals, EEGs always oscillate, or rise and fall, to
some extent, but the oscillations are usually quite irregular. When an
animal inhales a familiar scent, what we call a burst can be seen in
each EEG tracing. All the waves from the array of electrodes suddenly
become more regular, or ordered, for a few cycles-until the animal
exhales. The waves often have a higher amplitude (height) and
frequency than they do at other times.

The burst waves are often called 40 hertz waves, meaning that they
oscillate at about 40 cycles per second. Because the frequency can
actually range from 20 to 90 hertz, I prefer to call them gamma waves,
in analogy with a range of high-frequency X rays.

The fact that the bursts represent cooperative, interactive activity
is not immediately clear in the EEG plots, because the burst segments
differ in shape from tracing to tracing in a simultaneously recorded
set.  Nevertheless, by taxing our computers, we find we are able to
tease out evidence of collective behavior from the complex background.
In each set of burst recordings, we can identify a common waveform, or
carrier wave: a shared pattern of rises and falls that is embedded in
each tracing. The average amplitude is not identical across the
set-some versions of the carrier wave are shallow, and others are
deep. But all of them curve up and down nearly in synchrony. The
common behavior makes up between one quarter and three quarters of the
total activity of the neurons giving rise to each trace.

Curiously, it is not the shape of the carrier wave that reveals the
identity of an odor. Indeed, the wave changes every time an animal
inhales, even when the same odorant is repeatedly sniffed. The
identity of an odorant is reliably discernible only in the bulbwide
spatial pattern of the carrier- wave amplitude [see top illustration
on page 84].

Amplitude patterns become especially clear when we plot the average
amplitude of the individual versions of the carrier wave on a grid
representing the surface of the bulb. The resulting "maps" resemble
contour diagrams that indicate the elevations of mountains and
valleys. As long as we do not alter the animals' training, the same
map emerges every time an animal sniffs a particular odorant, even
though the carrier wave differs with each sniff.

These maps have helped demonstrate not only that perception requires
global bulbwide activity but also that the bulb participates in
assigning meaning to stimuli. The amplitude map representing a given
odorant changes strikingly when we alter the reinforcement associated
with that scent. If the bulb did not bring experience to bear on
perception, the map would remain constant even after the conditioned
association had been changed.

NEURONS OF THE OLFACTORY SYSTEM share information through a rich web
of synapses, junctions where signals flow from neuron to neuron.
Usually signals pass from projections called axons to projections
called dendrites, but sometimes they pass from dendrite to dendrite or
axon to axon. The widespread sharing leads to collective activity. In
this highly schematic diagram, red shading signifies that a neuron is
exciting another cell, black shading that a neuron is inhibiting
another.

We believe that something we call the nerve cell assembly is both a
crucial repository of past associations and an essential participant
in the formation of the collective bulbar burst. The hypothetical
assembly consists of neurons that have simultaneously been excited by
other neurons during learning.

More than 20 years ago my colleagues and I discovered that when
animals are trained by reinforcement techniques to discriminate
olfactory stimuli, certain synapses that connect neurons within the
bulb and within the olfactory cortex become selectively strengthened
during the training. That is, the sensitivity of the postsynaptic
cells to excitatory input-a property known as gain-is increased at the
synapse, so that an input generates a greater dendritic current than
it would have generated in the absence of special
training. Technically, gain is the ratio of output to input-here, the
net strength of the dendritic currents to the number of incoming
pulses.  The strengthening occurs not in the synapse between an input
axon (such as a receptor from the nose) and the neuron it excites
(such as a bulbar neuron) but in the synapse between connected neurons
that are simultaneously excited by input neurons during
learning. Neurons in the bulb and in the olfactory cortex are
connected to many others in those regions.

EEG WAVES reflect the mean excitation of pools of neurons. Excitatory
inputs at synapses generate electric currents that flow in closed
loops within the recipient neuron toward its axon, across the cell
membrane into the extracellular space and, in that space, back to the
synapse (red arrows).  Inhibitory inputs generate loops moving in the
opposite direction ( black arrows). In cells the trigger zone adds
current strengths (reflected in changes in voltage across the
membrane), and it fires impulses if the sum is sufficiently
positive. Electrodes on the brain tap those same currents after they
leave the cell. The resulting EEGs indicate the excitation of whole
groups of cells, not individuals, because the extracellular avenues
from which the EEGs arise carry currents contributed by thousands of
cells.

Such strengthening is predicted by the widely accepted Hebb rule,
which holds that synapses between neurons that fire together become
stronger, as long as the synchronous firing is accompanied by a
reward. (The strengthening is now known to involve "modulator"
chemicals that the brain stem releases into the bulb and cortex during
reinforcement.)  We infer from our data that a nerve cell assembly,
consisting of neurons joined by Hebbian synapses, forms for a
particular scent as an individual is reinforced for learning to
identify that odorant. Thereafter, when any subset of neurons in the
assembly receives the familiar input, the entire assembly can rapidly
become stimulated, as excitatory signals speed across the favored
Hebbian synapses. The assembly, in turn, directs the rest of the bulb
into a distinct pattern of activity.

If we are correct, the existence of a nerve cell assembly would help
explain both the foreground-background problem and
generalization-over- equivalent receptors. In the first instance, the
assembly would confer "frontrunner" status on stimuli that experience,
stored in the Hebbian synapses has made important to the
individual. In the second instance, the assembly would ensure that
information from any subset of receptors, regardless of where in the
nose they were located, would spread immediately over the entire
assembly and from there to the rest of the bulb.

SIMULTANEOUS RECORDINGS from the olfactory bulb (a) and front (b) and
rear (c) parts of a cat's olfactory cortex show low-frequency waves
interrupted by "bursts"-high-amplitude, high-frequency oscillations
that are generated when odors are perceived. The average amplitude of
a burst is some 100 microvolts. Each lasts a fraction of a second, for
the interval between inhalation and exhalation.

As important as the nerve cell assembly is to perception, it does not
by itself generate bulbwide bursts of collective activity. For a burst
to occur in response to some odorant, the neurons of the assembly and
the bulb as a whole must first be "primed" to respond strongly to
input.

Two important processes complement the priming accomplished by the
development of Hebbian synapses. Both processes affect the gain, doing
so by altering the sensitivity of the trigger zones, not the
synapses. Here the gain is the ratio of the number of pulses fired
(output) to the net dendritic current (input). The total gain is the
product of the gain at the synapses and trigger zones.

One primer is general arousal. Our experiments show that the gain in
neuronal collectives increases in the bulb and olfactory cortex when
an animal is hungry, thirsty, sexually aroused or threatened [see
illustration on page 85]. Such priming seems to be accomplished by
axons from elsewhere in the brain that release modulatory chemicals
(other than those involved in forming Hebbian synapses).

The other primer is input itself. When cortical neurons are excited,
their output increases. Each new input they receive while they are
still excited raises their output markedly, indicating that their gain
has been increased by the input. This increase occurs over a
particular range of input. If the net input is strongly inhibitory, no
pulses are fired. Above some very high level of excitatory input,
neurons fire at their maximal rate and cannot do more, even if the
input is increased. In the wide range between, however, pulse output
increases along a sigmoid (S-shaped) curve. The steepness, or slope,
of the curve reflects the gain.

The discovery of an increase in gain with excitation is particularly
noteworthy because most neural network models assume neurons are at
maximum gain when they are at rest. Both excitation and inhibition are
generally assumed to decrease gain, so that the networks constantly
maintain stability. Such assumptions are inappropriate for the brain
because they do not allow networks to generate explosive changes.
Hence, it seems that information from odorants is fed by a small
number of receptors to a still smaller number of cells in the bulb. If
the odorant is familiar and the bulb has been primed by arousal, the
information spreads like a flash fire through the nerve cell
assembly. First, excitatory input to one part of the assembly during a
sniff excites the other parts, via the Hebbian synapses. Then those
parts reexcite the first, increasing the gain, and so forth, so that
the input rapidly ignites an explosion of collective activity
throughout the assembly. The activity of the assembly, in turn,
spreads to the entire bulb, igniting a full-blown burst.

The bulb then sends a "consensus statement" simultaneously along
parallel axons to the olfactory cortex. What must next be made clear
is how that cortical area distinguishes the consensus statement from
the background of other stimuli impinging on it from the bulb and
elsewhere.

WHY EEG WAVES OSCILLATE

Alternating rises and falls in amplitude stem from negative-feedback
circuits that are established by the interaction of pools of
excitatory and inhibitory neurons. When the pools have been sensitized
to input, even a small input can trigger. A burst of high-amplitude
oscillation. The diagrams represent neuronal activity at the end of
each quarter cycle. Dark shading signifies great excitement; lighter
shading signifies less excitement.

The answer undoubtedly has to do with the wiring joining the bulb to
the cortex. The bulb generates trains of impulses that run
simultaneously along the parallel axons leading from the bulb to the
cortex. Each axon branches extensively and transmits pulses to many
thousands of neurons across the olfactory cortex, and each cortical
target cell receives input from thousands of bulbar cells.

The carrier activity of the incoming lines, which is synchronized by
cooperation, probably stands out for the simple reason that such
signals add together- nonsynchronous inputs, which are not at the
carrier frequency and phase, effectively cancel one another. Thus,
every recipient neuron in the olfactory cortex picks up a share of the
cooperative bulbar signal and transmits the summed signals to
thousands of its neighbors simultaneously.

In response, the massively connected neurons of the cortex, which have
formed their own nerve cell assemblies, promptly generate their own
collective burst, albeit one having a carrier wave and a spatial
amplitude pattern that differ from those in the bulb. In essence, the
transmission pathway for the global pattern in the bulb launders the
bulbar message; it removes "noise," so that only the collective signal
affects the olfactory cortex significantly. Just as a burst in the
bulb guarantees the delivery of a coherent message to the cortex, so
presumably does the global burst in the cortex enable outgoing
messages from that region to stand above the din when they reach other
regions of the brain.

There are many reasons why we believe the activity of the brain both
during and between bursts is chaotic, not merely random. But before I
delve into those reasons, let me clarify further what is meant by
chaos.  At the risk of oversimplification, I sometimes like to suggest
the difference between chaos and randomness by comparing the behavior
of commuters dashing through a train station at rush hour with the
behavior of a large, terrified crowd. The activity of the commuters
resembles chaos in that although an observer unfamiliar with train
stations might think people were running every which way without
reason, order does underlie the surface complexity: everyone is
hurrying to catch a specific train. The traffic flow could rapidly be
changed simply by announcing a track change.  In contrast, mass
hysteria is random. No simple announcement would make a large mob
become cooperative.

One of the most convincing early clues to the presence of chaos was an
aperiodic (nonrepeating) common carrier wave everywhere in the bulb
not only during bursts but also between bursts-even when there was no
extrabulbar stimulus driving that collective activity. The lack of
external driving meant the activity was self-generated by the
bulb. Such self- organization is a characteristic of chaotic systems
[see "Chaos," by James B.  Crutchfield, J. Doyne Farmer, Norman
H. Packard and Robert S. Shawl SCENTIFIC AMERICAN, December 1986].

Another clue was the apparent ability of neural collectives in the
bulb and cortex to jump globally and almost instantly from a nonburst
to a burst state and then back again. Rapid state changes are called
phase transitions by physicists and bifurcations by
mathematicians. Whatever they are called, dramatic changes in response
to weak input are, it will be recalled, another feature of chaotic
systems. Bifurcation is significantly harder to control in random
systems.

We gained more evidence for chaos by developing computer models of the
olfactory system as a whole: the bulb, the cortex, the connections
between them and the input to both areas from outside the system. We
simulated the activity of the system by solving sets of ordinary
differential equations that describe the dynamics of local pools of
neurons.

First we demonstrated that the model did in fact represent the
olfactory system accurately. With no more than a single pulse
(equivalent to excitation of a few receptors) to start the system, the
model sustained activity that closely resembled aperiodic olfactory
EEGs.

After we " trained" the model to recognize specific odorants, the
bulbar segment generated bursts in response to the selected inputs,
and the embedded common carrier waves yielded distinct and consistent
amplitude maps. Moreover, whenever we added a new "odorant" to the
perceptual repertoire of our hypothetical subject, an identifying
global amplitude map was created. At the same time, the other maps
changed-as they should, of course, in a true associative memory
system. We had earlier found such changes in test animals after they
were trained to recognize stimuli beyond the ones they had learned
initially.

COMMON CARRIER WAVE emerged from 60 EEGs recorded information is
contained in the spatial pattern of amplitude simultaneously from the
olfactory cortex of a rabbit as it recognized a scent. The wave is
nearly the same in each recording, except that the amplitude
varies. The shape of the carrier wave does not indicate the identity
of the scent. That information is contained in the spatial pattern of
amplitude across the cortex, which can be displayed as a contour plot,
much like the plots of elevations in topographic maps.  The colored
contours represent the highest amplitude; successive contours
represent the lower amplitudes.

Our model yielded additional evidence for chaos when we coaxed it to
produce mock EEGs of extended bursts and of "interburst" activity in
the intervals between bursts. Because the artificial EEGs persisted
longer than EEGs normally do, we were able to plot what are called
phase portraits of the predicted behavior of the olfactory system,
both during and between bursts. The portraits can show at a glance
whether the dynamics may be chaotic.

The details of how such portraits are made and why they are a valid
reflection of global activity in the olfactory system are too complex
to discuss at length. Nevertheless, for those readers familiar with
phase portraits, I should note that we plotted the portraits in a
three- dimensional grid and added color to display a fourth
dimension. Each axis represented EEG amplitude from some part of the
olfactory system, such as the bulb or a subsection of the olfactory
cortex. A range of colors from red to blue represented high to low
amplitude from a fourth part of the system.

We plotted as a point one set of three amplitudes, measured at a given
moment. Next we plotted another point from the set, representing a
thousandth of a second later, and connected the two points with a
colored line. Then we plotted a third point, and so on. We rotated the
final image in space to find the most informative point of view.

CONTOUR PLOT at the left emerged consistently from bulbar EEG's of a
rabbit that had been conditioned to associated the scent of sawdust
with a particular reinforcement. After the animal learned to recognize
the smell of banana (middle), however, reexposure to sawdust led to
the emergence of a new sawdust plot (right). The change shows that
bulbar activity is dominated more by experience than by stimuli;
otherwise, sawdust would always give rise to the same plot.

The pictures supported the possibility of chaos, because the images
resembled loose coils of wire having different shapes and color
distributions. If the model olfactory system had behaved randomly,
there would be no coherent shapes, just dots spread everywhere, like
"snow" on a television set. If, on the other hand, the system was
predictable in detail, the shapes would be simpler; they might
resemble a spiral, a folded circle or a torus (a doughnut).

The shapes we found represent chaotic attractors. Each attractor is
the behavior the system settles into when it is held under the
influence of a particular input, such as a familiar odorant. The
images suggest that an act of perception consists of an explosive leap
of the dynamic system from the "basin" of one chaotic attractor to
another; the basin of an attractor is the set of initial conditions
from which the system goes into a particular behavior. The bottom of a
bowl would be a basin of attraction for a ball placed anywhere along
the sides of the bowl. In our experiments, the basin for each
attractor would be defined by the receptor neurons that were activated
during training to form the nerve cell assembly.

We think the olfactory bulb and cortex maintain many chaotic
attractors, one for each odorant an animal or human being can
discriminate.  Whenever an odorant becomes meaningful in some way,
another attractor is added, and all the others undergo slight
modification.

SIGMOID CURVES show the relation between input (wave density) and
output (pulse density) at trigger zones in populations of
neurons. (The plots are not valid for individual neurons.) The rising
steepness associated with increased arousal indicates that sensitivity
to input-or gain (the ratio of output to input, or the slope)-rises
with arousal. In each case, gain also increases as neurons that are
already excited (those at and to the right of the circles) receive
more stimulation. This input-dependent increase in gain is essential
to the formation of bursts

Identification of chaos does not automatically reveal its source. We
suspect chaos in the brain arises when two or more areas of the brain,
such as the bulb and the olfactory cortex, meet at least two
conditions: they excite one another strongly enough to prevent any
single part from settling down, and, at the same time, they are unable
to agree on a common frequency of oscillation. Competition between the
parts would increase the sensitivity and instability of the system
contributing to chaos. Part of the evidence for the importance of
interaction between the bulb and the cortex is that disconnection of
the two regions makes chaos disappear; both parts become abnormally
stable and quiet.

Modulatory chemicals released into the system from elsewhere in the
brain also increase sensitivity to input, both by participating in the
formation of the Hebbian synapses in nerve cell assemblies and by
enhancing arousal. Because various factors maintain great sensitivity,
a very small signal-a whiff, a whisper, a glimpse-can trigger a
massive, collective state change.

Conceivably, the chaos we have observed is simply an inevitable by-
product of the brain's complexity, including its myriad
connections. Yet our evidence suggests that the controlled chaos of
the brain is more than an accidental by-product. Indeed, it may be the
chief property that makes the brain different from an
artificial-intelligence machine.

One profound advantage chaos may confer on the brain is that chaotic
systems continually produce novel activity patterns. We propose that
such patterns are crucial to the development of nerve cell assemblies
that differ from established assemblies. More generally, the ability
to create activity patterns I may underlie the brain's ability to
generate insight and the "trials" of trial and-error problem solving.

We have found widespread, apparently chaotic behavior in other parts
of the brain. That finding does not necessarily imply that other
sensory systems operate as the olfactory system does. But we think
they do.  Indeed, we and other investigators have documented gamma
bursts across large cortical regions involved in recognizing visual
images. As in the olfactory system, familiar visual stimuli are
associated with specific amplitude maps of common carrier waves. I
predict that when people examine drawings in which foreground and
background are ambiguous, so that perception alternates between two
images, the amplitude maps will be found to alternate as well.

I begin to envision the general dynamics of perception. The brain
seeks information, mainly by directing an individual to look, listen
and sniff. The search results from self-organizing activity in the
limbic system (a part of the brain that includes the entorhinal cortex
and is thought to be involved in emotion and memory), which funnels a
search command to the motor systems. As the motor command is
transmitted, the limbic system issues what is called a reafference
message, alerting all the sensory systems to prepare to respond to new
information.

And respond they do, with every neuron in a given region participating
in a collective activity-a burst. Synchronous activity in each system
is then transmitted back to the limbic system, where it combines with
similarly generated output from other sensory systems to form a
gestalt. Then, within a fraction of a second, another search for
information is demanded, and the sensory systems are prepared again by
reafference.

Consciousness may well be the subjective experience of this recursive
process of motor command, reafference and perception. If so, it
enables the brain to plan and prepare for each subsequent action on
the basis of past action, sensory input and perceptual synthesis. In
short, an act of perception is not the copying of an incoming
stimulus. It is a step in a trajectory by which brains grow,
reorganize themselves and reach into their environment to change it to
their own advantage.

The poet William Blake wrote: "If the doors of perception were
cleansed every thing would appear to man as it is, infinite." Such
cleansing would not be desirable. Without the protection of the doors
of perception-that is, without the self-controlled chaotic activity of
the cortex, from which perceptions spring-people and animals would be
overwhelmed by eternity.


FURTHER READING

MASS ACTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM: EXAMINATION OF THE
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL BASIS OF ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR THROUGH THE EEG. Walter
J. Freeman. Academic Press, 1975.

How BRAINS MAKE CHAOS IN ORDER TO MAKE SENSE OF THE WORLD. Christine
A. Skarda and Walter J. Freeman in behavioral and Brain Sciences,
Vol. 10 No. 2, pages 161-195; June 1987.

THE SYNAPTIC ORGANIZATION OF THE BRAIN. Third edition. Gordon M.
Shepherd. Oxford University Press, 1990.

SYNERGETICS OF COGNITION: PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM
AT SCHLOSS ELMAU, BAVARIA, JUNE 4-8, 1989. Edited by H.  Haken and
M. Stadler. Springer-Verlag, 1990.

Copyright 1991: Walter J. Freeman

